## Python, data science and the community: the past, present and future
### Fabio Pliger - software architect @ Anaconda & co-founder Python Italia

### Community and PyCon Italia
Community --> inspire you, make you laugh, make you think and learn things. 
He came for the language, stayed for the community. In particular the Italian
community is great. PyCon organizers really put a lot of energy into it. 

Community work is also hard: there will be obstacles and things that go wrong;
every year people have even better expectations for the next year. At the
beginning it's also not easy to fund the events, of course...

First PyCon: 2007 (he was one of the founding fathers).

### The trilogy of Python
1) The hackers: 

The first "movie" was led by some very talented people. People came from other
languages such as C, C++, Perl. Product management was a very geek thing.

2) The specialists:

People trying to solve their own problems, not about Python but about their
specific problems and topics --> many people from other areas (especially
scientific ones) came in and started autonomous, specific communities. Product
management was very community-driven. E.g. numpy. Companies started to use it.
People now didn't came for the language, but for doing their things with the
power this language gave them.

3) The "just let me do my thing":

Python is now very widespread, adopted by a lot of people that are not
programmers and do not care about the language, just about solving their
problems --> what is "product management" now?

### The present
All of these folks are part of the Python community --> it's a very diverse
community. It's hard to make everyone happy: users have different needs,
demographics are not equally represented, etc. We can not agree on some things,
but it's important to onboard everyone.

Right now, the newest generation of Pythonistas are not well represented among
the core developers (because it takes some time to learn it deeply).

Diversity is a great opportunity. Onboarding new generations requires good
documentation --> there is work to do in this direction.

Contrasting needs:
- optimization (speed) -- especially for scientific projects such as ML
  frameworks 
- accessibility

Why do people use Python in the first place? It's cool, it's expressive, it's
fun. E.g.: 
```
import antigravity
antigravity.fly()
```

- Designed for readability
- Easy to learn
- Rich library ecosystem 
- Does many things with modest effort
- Very popular, communities are generally very welcoming and pleasant 
- It's usually fast enough for most cases

### The future
Python is evolving towards filling its needs and growing bigger. Where it comes
short, is to fit the needs of its community, e.g.: native apps, mobile apps,
fullstack web apps, deploying and sharing them. Some packages work around this:
- BeeWare
- Kivy
- Pyodide
- Brython
- Skulpt

The efforts around optimizing Python should also go towards making it really
accessible to everyone, so that it can be ubiquitous. 

That's why they (including him) created **PyScript**. What is it? 
- Framework for creating rich Python apps in the browser
- Interleave python in HTML
- Full access to the web page (DOM)
- Can call and be called by JS libraries
- ...

[Project website](https://pyscript.net/)

It's now really popular and growing. They really care about the social aspect of
this project --> getting young people (like his daughter) excited about
technology (it got trending on TikTok) --> it's an inspiring thing.

How does it work technically? How is it different from different previous
efforts? 
- It's in CPython via WASM
- Includes core scipy and pydata stack via Pyodide
- It has an **opinionated** client-side web framework --> accessibility and
  easiness of use over purity
- Full access to the DOM
- Straightforward FFI between Python and JavaScript
- Python can wrap JS, as it is with C, C++, etc
- It's truly serverless, you don't need any server
  
So you write HTML, add PyScript assets in the head of your page and add Python
code using the tag <py-script>. 

It also has a flexible REPL, similarly to Jupyter notebooks.

Serverless --> you just run everything in your browser. 

What is it not?
- a "serverless Jupyter"
- a replacement for JS
- sticking all of scipy/pydata into a browser runtime
- not just about the web
- not competitive to the ecosystem --> they are not trying to reinvent the wheel 

You can do some simple as well as more complex things:
- interact with applications with a wrapper
- show a plot
- show a YouTube video in a div
- plotting applications (matplotlib, folium), interactive and in real-time as
  well 
- D3
- render 3D shapes on the browser with a rendering engine
- DWare (backend for PyScript)
- map renders to data
- ...
- these slides were also made with PyScript

In the future: reactive framework.