## Automate cleaning code in few easy steps!
### Ester Beltrami - made.com

- PyCon Italia organizer
- Poetry package manager onctributor
- Strawberry-graphql core developer

Tests are passing locally, you commit and push... But some things in the
pipeline are failing: we forgot to run the linter and formatter. We could also
have set it up on Docker.

We can solve this problem using **pre-commit**. It's a multi-language tool with
which we can configure some checks to do before committing. We can set up some
hooks and the version (so that the whole team uses the same one). 
Some hooks that should be included:
- `pyupgrade` upgrades syntax to the latest versions
- `flake8-eradicate` finds dead code
- `autoflake` removes unused imports and variables
- `black` for formatting
- as well as code quality, there are some hooks for security, e.g.
  `detect-aws-credentials` or `detect-private-key`

--> identify the silliest issues before code review (e.g. new line at the end of
a file)

It's also not just about Python, but also infrastructure (e.g. markdown, bash,
Ansible, Terraform, NodeJS). And it just runs checks for parts that have been
edited among these tools. 

Some developers don't like it because they find it slow -- but it only takes few
seconds after committing. Solutions:
- if some checks are slower (quality checks), you can skip them
- you can run them on different stages (pre-commit, post-commit, pre-merge,
  post-merge...) 
- you can run them manually only when needed

You have to remember to install `pre-commit` on every new repo. But you can also
create a **git template** and add it to our template config.

You shouldn't force your team to use it, you can also use it every once in a
while. 

You can also run it on your pipeline, or use `pre-commit.ci`.

What else can you do with pre-commit?
- some commands in makefiles are no longer necessary
- we can move some dotfile configurations (from our project root folder) to the
  `pyproject.toml` file --> it's the specified file format for PEP 518 that
  contains build system requirements for Python projects

Another cool tool that manages environment, packages etc. is **Poerty** --> with
this `pyproject.toml` file. The upcoming version (1.2) also manages to group
dependencies (not just distinguish production/development) and adds plugins to
add your own functionalities. 

It shows what your package/project depends on. It's like `npm` for Python (??).

---

### Q&A
It's better than `pip` + `venv`. It's an alternative do `conda`.

How to use pre-commit in company legacy code: ask and of course make a PR before
changing all codebase! And run it on all files together immediately.