## Best practices for good(ish) and clean(ish) code
### Ernesto Arbitrio - YouGov & organizer PyCon IT

Clean code = 
- readable
- maintainable
- elegant
- testable

"Clean code is simple and direct. Clean code reads like well-written prose."
(...) 

"Clean code always looks like it was written by someone who cares." (Michael
Feathers) --> you care about others and especially who comes next. 
When you read a code for the first time (e.g. new in a team), you have to rely
on it and it has to be readable. 

Code quality is measured in WTFs per minute --> how to reduce the WTFs per
minute? 

### Reading and writing the code
80% writing, 20% reading. At the beginning of writing some code, your
productivity is high. But if after some time you do not refactor it, your
productivity will tend towards zero over time. Especially in a team and for
other team members as well. 

What prevents clean code? Mostly saying "I'll do the refactoring later" -->
later never comes!

Is it worth it owning a mess? 

### Rules about names
- use descriptive names, even if they are long. They should always represent the
  developer's idea. E.g. `d` --> `days_before_creation`
- use meaningful name, e.g. `moddYmd` --> `modification_date` (why do you need
  the capital Y?)
- use searchable names, e.g. `CTX_RSP_DICT` --> `CONTEXT_RESPONSE`, `sum` -->
  `total_people` 
- class names should be noun or noun phrases, not verbs
- method names should have verbs or verb phrases and describe what they do 

### Comments
Comments sometimes lie -- because they might not get refactored when something
changes. Code, instead, never lies. Some comments are unnecessary when the code
completely explains itself. Comments should only be meaningful, and be used when
the code is complex -- but if the code is complex you might want to do some
refactoring. It's bad to use a comment to avoid programming effort (e.g.
changing variable names, making the code more readable) --> don't comment bad
code, rewritee it.

### Functions
A function should only do one thing --> 
- split functions that do more than one thing into smaller functions
- use clear names about what the function does 

To check that a function only does one thing --> extract iteratively things that
the function is doing.

Cyclomatic complexity --> difficult code to read and understand cognitively.
`flake8` can tell you if the code is too complex (smelly). E.g. lots of `if`s. 

"Law of Demeter": use only 1 dot when chaining methods (for readability). E.g.:
to make a `Dog` move, you don't call `Dog.move().move().move()`, but you can
create a `Dog` method called `move` that includes the `for` loop we want to use. 

### Refactoring
**However**: "premature optimisation is the root of all evil" (Donald Knuth) -->
we should not introduce functions today if we don't know whether they are
actually useful/will be used in the future. Too many useless features can be
misleading for new team members. 

This is similar to the "boyscout rule": you must leave the playground cleaner
than when you arrived --> continuous refactoring --> reduces technical debt.

### Tests
They are **mandatory** to have before doing refactoring, because otherwise we
cannot be sure that changing something does not break anything!

Experience also matters in recognizing code smells.

---

### Q&A
Are linters enough to enforce clean code? All tools that help us find problems
in the code help us. They should be enough, if used properly. 

How to enforce clean code? One of the most important thing is doing multiple
code reviews: have more than one reviewer on a PR (a single person might be
biased in some way). And not only async code reviews, but also sync code
reviews.

Design patterns: if some requirement changes, you might have to change
completely the design pattern --> relying on design patterns can lead to code
smells (this is his opinion).

In open source, small PRs are preferred --> how can I propose a refactoring? If
someone proposes something that is not clean, should the reviewer ask them to
refactor in that same PR, or to open a new one? If the code is well enough for
today, you can deliver it but immediately create a new story to refactor it in
another PR. Especially if there is a customer's need behind it, because cleaning
code takes time.