## Continuous documentation for your Python code
### Anastasiia Tymoshchuk - Soundwide (~ Native Instruments!)

[GitHub repo](https://github.com/atymoshchuk/simple_docs_setup)
[Personal website](https://atymo.me)

When you write your code, it seems beautiful and understandable at first. You
may not be completely sure it's finished, when it's ready for
production/sharing. 

How to make sure that your future self understands the code you write? 

4 pieces of advice:
1) **how-to guides** should have a problem-oriented approach --> takes the
   reader through the steps required to solve a specific, real-world problem -->
   they are recipes, directions to achieve a specific end. So, at first, to make
   your code happier, you can add a simple step-by-step readme explaining the
   setup (for example)
2) add **tutorials** with a learning-oriented approach --> lessons that take the 
   reader by the hand through a series of steps to complete a specific project
   of some kind. E.g. basic tutorial on how to setup 
3) add **explanation** with an understanding-oriented approach: explanation, or 
   discussions, that clarify and illuminate a specific topic, broadening the
   documentation's coverage of a topic (e.g. integrations). For example an
   article about "how to write documentation, and why?"
4) **references** with an information-oriented approach: they are directly in
   the code and should be updated continuously (e.g. Sphinx documentation)

"There is a secret that needs to be understood in order to write good software
documentation: there isn't one thing called documentation, but there are four". 

Remember these things to be motivated to write documentation:
- people forget things (you who wrote the code as well!)
- people leave the code alone --> it cannot write its own documentation 
- new people come to contribute, for open-source as well as in teams --> there
  should be guidelines on how to contribute

Things to check to see if we're on the right track:
- choose main source/tool for documentation
- make sure that the documentation is up-to-date

Articles recommendation:
- [documentation.divio.com](documentation.divio.com)
- [understandlegacycode.com/blog/where-to-put-documentation](understandlegacycode.com/blog/where-to-put-documentation)

How to start?
- start as simple as possible. Don't think about it too much, just start writing 
- use version-controlled docs
- for Python, you can start with Sphinx and then you can try Read The Docs
  (there are both open- and closed-source versions)
- there are also tools to check that all code is documented (referenced)

Keep in mind that you cannot force people to read documentation: if you want to
implement continuous documentation, it has to go into the company culture. If
you are not in a leading position, you can set an example to show how bright the
future looks, as well as adding tutorials and guides.

---

### Q&A
Are there tools to check that the documentation is updated? See CI steps in repo
--> "run doc coverage": `interrogate -c pyproject.toml -v app` (maybe a little
old), with a set coverage that makes the pipeline succeed or fail.