## Inclusive community leadership 
### Jessica Greene

-- Building sustainable communities from within

* What does leadership look like in the community? Who are role models, and how
  do they shape the community? 
* What is inclusive leadership for me?
* What can tech leaders learn from the community leaders?

Community (her definition) = a group with a shared common interest and/or goal,
with voluntary participation. E.g. tech community, Python community.
Leadership = skills and work that help shape an organisation or team.
Leadership != role -- it's a skillset itself, and can be practiced at any level. 
What barriers might there be in people who would like to be involved in
leadership? 

Key takeaways from the talk:
- insights from her experience by leading the PyLadies community
- reconsider what leaders look like and what they do
- tips on how to make decision making more inclusive and leadership more
  accessible 
- get to know some amazing community leaders

Jessica Greene: software engineer @Ecosia, community organiser PyLadies Berlin.
Formerly: barista, camera assistant (~ 5 years ago) --> self/community-taught
developer.

### Leadership roles in community
PyLadies = formed 2011 by 7 women. Now it's a global community --> how to make
the Python community more inclusive.
Find your community (in-person events) = meet people, learn things, enjoy free
food and drinks. Still, she struggled when she started out attending these
workshops. Sometimes she was quite sad, but she kept going inspired by people
around here and thinking that eventually she would get there. Everyone was
friendly and welcoming --> sense of belonging. One that she had never felt in a
non-women centered environment.

Community/conference organisation: the first time she had the responsibility to
organise an event, she was super excited. In the end, half of the people that
signed up on Meetup came. --> you learn a lot by organising events, personally
and professionally. 
Benefits by being involved as community organiser: visibility as a leader -->
e.g. for job searching, and also social media following --> you get to speak
with more people.

After two years of being a PyLadies leader, she was exhausted --> she stepped
back and had a chance to reflect about this experience. 
First she asked herself: who are our (PyLadies) leaders? How can they make the
environment more inclusive?

Tips for contributing to the community:
1) take part in surveys and polls --> make your voice heard
2) answer questions in Slack/Discord --> support other members, so that they
   feel encouraged to stay in the community
3) coach/mentor
4) one off/regular event organisation
5) web site contributions
6) email and social media
7) you never know what you can do to contribute

Barriers to being an organiser:
- impostor syndrome
- time (especially for unpaid labour) -- she spends 3/4 hours a week in
  community work. It's not a problem if your company supports you, which should
  be encouraged as well as e.g. open source contributions are
- support of older community members
- process: knowing how to get started --> easier if processes are
  well-documented. Don't forget to make it easily findable for new users (e.g.
  with Slack workflow --> first message for a new user)
- feedback: understanding the impact of your work. What is your motivation for
  doing it?

Everyone is different: what was helpful for her, might not be the same for us.
Be flexible for new ideas and voices to come in.

Representation is also very important in leadership --> to have better
performance. 
You really have to put work into making sure that your community is safe --> you
don't really know other community members' needs if you present as white and
cishet (intersectional feminism).

PyLadies global council: all chapters can operate independently; the council was
founded more recently to have a global leadership. At a local level it is less
structured. 

Visibly leading = also reaching out and making sure all voices are heard and all
members feel included. E.g. Pacman rule at PyCon (to include people when you're
speaking with a group of people).
Inclusive leadership is not just better for everyone, it's also what we should
be doing. Now it's trendy to have D&I but it's also the right thing to do.

Building frameworks for inclusive decision making --> be transparent, make sure
you cover many different perspectives. How can we do this?
1) accessibility: decision making must be accessible --> resources should be
   available to everyone (of course with security and common sense in mind)
2) transparency: decisions must be transparency, everyone must be able to know
   the process behind it, and know where the community is going and observe the
   process --> put stuff in as many public channels as possible --> when they
   feel comfortable, everyone can get involved if they want
3) representativity: the role should represent everyone, or anyway you must make
   sure that everyone's voice is heard
4) recognisability: leadership work must be valued and celebrated --> tangible
   reason for which it makes sense to be a community leader in your free time
5) space for innovation: flexibility for new ideas and formats

### Leadership roles in tech
They have gender quotas in teams, but not in leadership roles --> why, and how
can this be changed?
- < 10% of startups in the world owned or led by women
- 25% of women are confident that they could be promoted to executive management 
- 30% white women - 18% black women in entry-level jobs in tech

Community leaders don't have a position of power -- they don't have any power on
community members, they just have to make sure they organise things that are
interesting enough for them.
E.g. make sure that even if someone is working part-time (parents) can have
leadership roles.

Actions we can take:
- co-lead: split roles to create space for others to participate in decision
  making 
- set rotation: allow space for fresh ideas and voices
- redefine roles: reduce barriers such as time commitment and rethink the
  profile of a lead
- mentor someone else to be able to replace you
- training: leadership is a trained skill, not about length of time in a role.
  In some sense, it's similar to learning to be a developer
- incentives: the effort has to be worth it. Recognise the additional work that
  minorities might be making to reach that same position

Summary: challenge current structures, listen actively and amplify the voices of
others. 

Thank others (community members/leaders) for their work and mentorship!

--- 

### Q&A

What would you suggest to switch to the tech world from a different background?
--> **community**! 

Leader approach to someone that does not play fairly in the team? 
Depends on what's going on and what the topic is. You must be firm because
people look up to you, e.g. if there is a code of conduct breach --> you must
make sure that it is followed. 

If you have many options on a topic? 
You vote. 

You can see and understand if a company just wants to "exploit" your community
or if it really wants to support it. (E.g. also with open source: if they
support you developing open software but not organising open source events) 

If your company is supportive about diverse team but don't get a diverse pool of
applicants, what should they do? 
Probably they are not doing enough -- e.g. support diverse communities more.