## Introduction to network analysis by analyzing characters in Harry Potter fanfiction 
### Sara Jakša

[Slides -- not working :(](https://sarajaska.eu/content/presentations/2022/pycon-italy-network-analysis)

What is network analysis? It's more general than machine learning/text analysis,
and it can be used for many different topics. It's about understanding the
relationships between elements. 

Dataset: AO3 fanfiction tags about Harry Potter. 
Creating a network with Python + defining relations between people (in this
case). Nodes = HP characters. Relations: depend on how popular the relationship
between characters is. Main nodes (characters) have many connections, whereas
those that are less popular are usually at the edges of the graph. You can also
have multiple connections, but we won't talk about those today. 

Description of a graph: easy metrics such as number of nodes, number of
relationships, density (how many connections nodes have on average), how long it
would take to get from one node to another. 
You can also have disconnected components in the graph (stranders?). Most of the
nodes are connected anyway. With Python (`networkx` package), you can get the
connected components. 

There are also some surprises in the AO3 HP fanfiction characters, e.g.
historical English nobility or Formula 1 drivers (unconnected with HP
characters). 

Nodes that are more important in the network --> **centrality** of nodes. For
human networks, a study shows that they are those people who can start a change
(because they are influenced by many different people).

BAMF trope (Bad Ass Mother Fucker) -- she really likes it: in these fanfictions,
we have the usual characters and also more Slytherins than usual. 

To find the most important person (the one with most connections) you use the
**degree centrality**: in this case, we have Harry, Hermione and Draco first.
(You also find these with `networkx`).

Another one is **betweenes centrality** = ...

**Page rank** also tries to figure out how important the connections are, e.g.
Luna doesn't have many friends but she's friend with Harry so she is quite
important. You can also see correlations between degree centrality, betweenes
centrality and page rank.

How to pick nodes and edges? Depend on what you're actually trying to analyze --
e.g. if you're studying characters or relationships as nodes. Example: tag
"Remus Lupin needs a hug" --> are there different relationships that are more
common in this subset than in all HP fanfictions? Yes.

You can also try to find **community**: nodes that are more closely connected
one another. E.g. fanfic trope alpha/beta/omega genders --> how is this tag
different for HP fandom? There are different networks, also with different
crossovers.

