## Sustainable code panel
### Jessica Greene, Chris Adams, Uljan Sharka, Valerio Maggio (moderator)

Software sustinability institute in the UK --> perspective about sustainability
in the code. What about the environment? 

On a basic level, the energy has to come from somewhere, usually from fossil
fuels --> that's something we might want to think about (Green Web Foundation).
You can think about consumption (how much energy you're using), intensity (is
the energy we're using green?), direction (what am I using this code for? Are
they 'green' purposes? Where do the profits go?). 
E.g. Jessica --> Ecosia. 

Sustainability in the code = make it work better and more efficiently, transfer
learning between applications, don't duplicate functionality, face performance
issues (e.g. caching). It's not just about the backend, but also about frontend:
is it easy for the user to use the functionality? Do they need to print paper
(for example)? 
Have a mindset with sustainable architecture first, then all the rest follows. 

Why should we think about making our code sustainable? 
The end goal is to increase impact overall -- also by measuring it, e.g. how
much energy are we using? Are we creating more positive impact in the whole
value chain? 

What should we have in mind about the whole pipeline? 
Examples of unintended impacts: direction of my work (e.g. I write sustainable
code for oil extraction), or user effect (e.g. for my software to run, the user
needs the latest iPhone). Other sets of reasons to keep it in mind:
accessibility. 

Make visible the impact of what we can do -- how people can take action about
what they can do. Some energy-consuming activities are not visible, e.g. code
running in the cloud --> energy/carbon consumption. 
What can you do? Have a tech KPI to measure your sustainability footprint, and
try to improve it, also by raising awareness. 

There is going to be a lot of push from the market to achieve sustainability
goals, but it makes sense to already be prepared to this and start thinking
about it. 
ESG = Environmental, Social and Government --> investors decide in which
companies to invest depending on these. It's starting to be used right now, with
weird results for example Exxon's ESG is currently higher than Tesla's. 
Anyway, it's going to be more and more important in the future. 
E.g. in the UK you can only win some contracts if you demonstrate that you use
green clouds, etc. Or EU funds will be given to green companies first. 

You don't need to measure these on your own -- they will do it -- but you have
to make the right decisions and do the right thing. 

How big is the impact on the management level vs. the technical details? 
It's the same as accessibility: it has to come from everyone, both the
management and the whole team. 
Does having more diverse perspectives help in this direction? 
We have to keep in mind that people who are already seeing the effects of
climate change are usually not from North America and Europe: we have to be very
actively listening to those other countries. 

How are big tech companies working in this direction? 
AWS: they said they would be doing what costumers are asking them to do --> we
have some responsibility to be asking some questions about sustainability to
these big tech companies, and we need to have some degree of knowledge about it. 
E.g. most of the infrastructure used on the cloud is based on oil --> should we
switch to smaller providers? But they are more expensive... e.g. Digital Ocean
(??) 

How can you take action starting now? 
- Ask these KPI from your company --> also on job seeking.
- Get ownership, make sure you are asking for it and check that the positive
  effects are obtained one way or the other.

Many different things intersect: tech debt, having good documentation, reuse
code, of course the final goal of the project. E.g. heavy AI application that
consumes more energy than it wants to reduce. We have to measure both what we
want to have an impact on, as well as what is happening before and while we are
trying to achieve it. 

Technical examples of software that became 'greener': 
- iGenius (BI space): product named Crystal that uses NLP to ... But it was
  impossible to query data in real time --> they created a structure that caches
  data where possible. Customer companies that adopted it saw significant drops
  in power consumption --> switch from big data to 'small and ... data': it has
  been proven to be more effective and efficient. Search is also going in this
  direction --> 'search around you' instead of global search.
- Python is nice to use, but not necessarily the fastest language (e.g. compared
  to Go): with Go, you understand better what's happening under the hood on a
  machine level --> you can easily customize it and make it more efficient.
  Python seems fast to us, but it's not really (e.g. also the new pattern
  matching feature -- it's actually something that already exists in other
  languages). Python is a 'glued' language, but some things are more efficient
  done e.g. in C++ directly.
- Ecosia: every search is not only neutral, but 'negative' because they plant
  trees. You can also use #g to use Google from Ecosia! (If you don't find your
  result) 

Source codes and tech stacks are checked by the Green Web Foundation to see how
'green' they are. It's also a very nice, big community.

How to start the 'revolution'? Send an email to our company and ask them what
they are doing about sustainability......

--- 

### Q&A 
To see sustainability in the whole process: 
- start from the use case, make it specific and multidimensional --> you create
  a composite knowledge about the needs of the end user --> decouple complexity
  (many different micro-products that would need to run more times)
- the dataset you need (e.g. for machine learning) --> use the smallest one 
- set up the architecture. Keep in mind that microservices can be quite
  expensive if not managed correctly. 
- infrastructure: the most common cloud providers let you set up some things to
  be more efficient

Another example is deciding where your servers run, e.g. HuggingFace moved them
to Montreal (?) where energy is super green.