## Everything you always wanted to know about async but were afraid to ask 
### Enrico Deusebio

[GitHub repo](https://github.com/CGnal/async-examples)

Today's talk puts together two concepts: concurrency + functional programming
--> create **lazy composable operations** that can be executed when we please. 

### Concurrency
What's the difference between concurrent and parallel? 

Example: vending machine --> you get a drink with two steps: 1. choose drink 2.
fetch drink. 

Concurrent: two queues for the same machine. It doesn't make sense if, for
example, you cannot choose the drink --> you would have to wait. This is async
threading (IO bound operations).

Parallel: you have different resources --> two queues for two machines --> you
don't have to wait. This is multiprocessing (CPU bound operations).

### Threading vs. async vs. multiprocessing
**Threading**: happens at interpreter level.

**Multiprocessing**: happens at hardware level (processes).

**Async** (e.g. `asyncio` in Python) is done at application level --> depends on
the implementation. 

The async component takes care that tasks are scheduled on the event-loop. For
async, you have to write a special function that is a **co-routine** with
keyword `async` --> within the routine, you have a special place where you have
to wait for the results --> you mark it with the `await` keyword. 

After writing a co-routine, you have to schedule it in the event loop and run
the loop until the co-routine task is executed. These three operations are now
(Python 3.7) all wrapped with `asyncio.run(coroutine())`. 

Nested multiple async operations --> list of co-routines that must be executed
asynchronously (`asyncio.gather` function). 

### Functional programming
- Pure functions with no side-effects
- Functions as first-class entities
- Immutability
- Reference transparency

**Monad**: a concept that comes from languages such as Scala. It's a
mathematical concepts. In programming, it's simply a class that's iterable and
only has one method. 

One monad that is very interesting is the **promise** monad --> it's an object
that represents the result of a computation --> expands the concept of async
operations adding 
- composability
- error handling

Python: `pymonad` package. 
- `map` is a monad method that executes a method on the `promise` to apply a
  transformation.  
- `bind` is another method for a monad's result that is a monad itself.
- finally, `then` is `map` + `bind` together: you create a computation and then
  apply a transformation on it. (?)
You have to use the `await` keyword on these.

By using only `Promise`s and `map`s, you create a lazy computation --> only a
pipeline that is not yet executed until you call the object. (?)

**Error handling**: after `then`, you can call `catch` to catch errors and reset
the output. 

### Async
Intersection of concurrency and functional programming. 

Example: you have some IDs - download from a REST - enrich/process data - write
to a database --> you can do it by chaining some `then`s (pipeline). 
You can also decide to await to have a rate limit (throttle) so that your IP
does not get blocked. 

If the operations we have to perform require computations --> make things
parallel: mix async programming and parallel programming --> you have a master,
create jobs with workers (**job splitting**) and in each worker you use async
programming. 

---

### Q&A
When is multithreading better than async? 
With async, you have full control of processes and when the swapping happens.