## Psycopg from 2 to 3: designing and living free software
### Daniele Varrazzo

- Working with Python since 2003
- Contributing to Psycopg since 2006
- Maintaining it since 2010
- Making a (bit of a) living writing Free Software since 2020

### Psycopg
It's the Python connector for PostgreSQL (small thing between two very big
projects). In his opinion, you shouldn't even know you're using it: it should
feel like part of the flow. 

Psycopg 2 has been around since 2006. 
- It's a Python package, with its core code written in C --> pretty fast
- It's a wrapper around `libpq` (the official PostgrSQL client library) 
- Supports almost everything that can be supported with the "simple query"
  protocol 
- Well integrated with async programming and threads
--> quite efficient, mature codebase

### Motivation for upgrading
However, it has these disadvantages:
- C is hard to develop and has limited portability
- Using the "simple query" protocol only is also a limit --> cannot use prepared
  statement or binary data, and gets in the way of performance (large values
  bloat the server parser)
- Has rudimentary support for COPY
- It's not on PyPy nor GitHub (?)
  
**Simple query protocol**: 
`cur.execute("SELECT ...")` -->
- can't ask the server to bind the parameters
- can't prepare the statement
- formatting is not good for copy because you have to handle escapes correctly
  (you cannot use copy-paste)

It should use the extended query protocol instead --> you can pass parameter
separately, use proper statements as well as binary format, and use copy-paste. 

Moreover, Psycopg has been around before the `wheel` packages --> different
versions of C libraries are required --> incompatible e.g. with `requests` (at
the beginning) --> the solution was creating a different `psycopg2-binary`
package. But it was really messy.

In Python 3, `asyncio` started to set the standard of async paradigm -- and
`psycopg2` is async, but not in the `asyncio` way. Static typing is more and
more requested and C compilers are not everywhere anymore (e.g. Docker images). 

Competition also arrived, e.g. `asyncpg` that is really fast, and has a
completely different interface --> impossible to use for projects where you
already used psycopg2.

--> he started thinking about making a successor for Psycopg 2. Design ideas:
- must be easy to replace `psycopg2` with --> interface changes only where
  necessary 
- must be fast enough to compete with `asyncpg`
- must address serious pain points and yummy features: installation, `asyncio`,
  ... 

### Psycopg 3
First commit was done in March 2020, finished (stable release) in October 2021
--> 18 months of development.

- Now the package is called `psycopg` (possible as it's been released on PyPy
  for the first time
- It is now pure Python, the C layer (actually, Cython) is an add-on to make it
  go faster 
- There is also the binary wheel
- Packages for Apple M must still be done (it requires a bit more work)
- It does not depend on anything (?)

Profiling in Python + C --> `py-spy`: can also profile a running program and
makes pretty graphs. Use it if your program seems slow.

- Now supports COPY --> a record can be added as soon as it's ready (e.g. from
  user input) --> fastest way to add data to the database
- Context management: context is object's lifetime, transactions have their own 
  context and cursor can be used to receive results
- Performance is much better (faster than `psycopg2`), also compared with
  `asyncpg` 

Psycopg 3.1 is on its way --> new features:
- pipeline mode --> faster batch operation + `executemany()`
- client-side cursors (better Psycopg 2 compatibility)
- cute enum adaptation
- 2-phase commit support

Waiting for some support from the outside ("friends"):
- SQLAlchemy
- Django
- Several projects moving to Psycopg 3
- PyPy and Conda --> should tell what is not working
- Scientific world --> easier conversions to pandas and numpy? 

### Free software maintainance
[hkcd://2347 comic]

Being a FS maintainer:
- has his strong opinions, but listens to others (community) 
- position of trust = privilege + responsibility. See what happened with @marak
  (was not happy of not being paid, published software with malware)
- but is something owed to FS? See recent Log4j episode

How to make a living?
- You have a paid job by day, and in your free time you maintain FS --> many
  people do this, but would like to move away from this model: it cannot be a
  reliable source of free software
- A little bit better is having an understanding employer, that want a piece of
  FS to work well --> you dedicate some of your paid working time to maintaining
  it. But not every employer might have this disposition
- Sponsorship model: it's becoming more and more popular, might be a path
  towards independence of FS maintainer. Kickstarter might not work (only at the
  beginning of a project, and you have to make a lot of advertising); GitHub
  Sponsor is working better now: you receive monthly payment from people who are
  sponsoring your project. ~ Patreon in the art world

Psycopg was lucky because received a lot of sponsorship, mainly from Postgres
companies and smaller companies that have been using Psycopg 2 for a long time.
His suggestion is to ask: you might be given sponsorship. 

### Anatomy of a FS developer
He's white, male, has a good passport, has free time to improve his skills, has
a supportive family that didn't get in the way --> has a lot of privilege.

A lot of people would like to do as much but do not have the possibility of
doing it. He's not ashamed of his privilege, but it's something to acknowledge,
it's also luck. 
--> accept other people that don't have the same background (IT is more and more
open to a bigger audience), be welcoming in your team 

Consider supporting associations that are supportive to have a bigger audience,
e.g. Django girls, Codebar (not yet in Italy: offices offer their spaces for
people to work and learn together), your favourite FS project (it's also an easy
entry point for next generation talents, to present yourself to the community
and show your skills). 

So many social and political movements are trying to create separation: so
strange in the internet age, where you can learn on the internet as well as at
university if you can't afford it --> it is a good moment to empower people, not
to divide --> be open to people who are going towards FS.

♥️
---

### Q&A
Do large companies interfere with development sometimes when they support FS? It
never happened to him but something slightly unpleasant is if they want to
change license from RGPL (?) to BSD (?).