## How the internet could be healthier 
### Solana Larsen - Mozilla

Her background is in journalism --> where technology meets community, curator of
the Internet Health Report. At Mozilla, they think about the internet like an
ecosystem. 

Technology is created and used by humans --> we can make it more or less
healthy. 

Mozilla is a non-profit organization, she works for the Foundation. It has a
10-principles manifesto, including both how the internet should be used and how
it should be coded. It is an open organization (open source, etc). 

She joined Mozilla before the "tech backslash" e.g. Cambridge Analytica: now
there is more and more attention about being open, decentralized, listening to
different communities. 

5 internet health issues: it's not just technical things, we need to work
together with different fields, policy makers etc. These issues are:
1) privacy and security: is it safe?
2) openness: how open is it?
3) inclusion: who is welcome?
4) web literacy: who can succeed?
5) decentralization: ...?

Internet health report: it's difficult to have an indicator. There are some
metrics but also lots of stories.

### Some sneak peeks from the next report (2021)
- Nearly half of the world is still offline: this is bad news 
- It's not just a choice that people make: where in the world is a smartphone
  accessible compared with wages --> how many days would you need to work to buy
  a smartphone? Every country in the world has part of the population that
  cannot afford to be online, but in some countries it is worse or course.
- As well as cost, speed of internet also matters. Right now, countries where it
  costs more (in Africa) are also those where it is slower.
- Every day, the internet is shut down somewhere --> it can be for political
  reasons --> where it happens, human rights violations often happen.
- 58% of 14000 young women and girls in 22 countries all over the world faced
  online abuse or harassment (higher for people of colour/non-binary) --> these
  problems exist everywhere, but they are amplified where other problems also
  exist. 
- Who has power over the internet? The big tech companies (Apple, Microsoft,
  Amazon, Alphabet, Facebook, Tencent, Alibaba) -- they are also the biggest
  companies in the world, not only in tech --> they are a threat to the openness
  of the internet.
- These also have most of the market share of cloud services.
- And also of undersea cables. 
- Big tech also enables great things, we should be thankful for some things they
  do. But the problem is when they don't listen about moderating content,
  privacy regulations. Their staff is also increasingly protesting against some
  things (activism): environment, working conditions, sexual harassment, ... -->
  this is all part of the "tech backslash".

But what should we do as well as complaining? What can we do? 
Mozilla's vision for the evolution of the Web --> things that should not be
viewed as a threat to big tech companies, but they are just things to make the
internet environment more protective.

### Some other Mozilla projects
**Mozilla Rally**: choose to share your data with Mozilla for research projects 
about privacy, to figure out what the big companies are doing without you
knowing. 

**Mozilla Network Outages Data Project**: where outages are happening and why
they might be happening (depending on how much of the population uses Firefox).

### Artificial intelligence
How can we have an impact on the next generations that will be using the
internet? They focused on AI as an area that currently needs a lot of work. It
affects every area of our lives now, and little is known about its benefits and
possible risks over the population.

Annual revenues of big tech companies from AI have been rising since the
pandemic --> everything they are doing with AI is just used to have bigger
revenues. 

Gender, racial and ethnic diversity is really bad in these big tech companies
--> it's improving very very slowly, and consequently the benefits of AI are
just affecting some people (privileged ones) in the world. E.g. voice
recognition doesn't work if you have an accent, people of colour are not
recognized by face recognition, prediction of crimes... 

Who is making private investements in AI? First places: US, China (Germany is
4th!). 

Big tech affiliations in publications are enormously growing in percentage
compared to 10 years ago. --> Who is actually talking the most about AI, and
what are they using it for?

Frequency of datasets used for performance benchmarking in AI research papers
--> the majority of these datasets come from few company from the US, Hong Kong,
Germany. There are also datasets in other parts of the world that could be used
for benchmarking, but we have decided not to use them. 

So, how can we make AI more trustworthy? 
Mozilla --> AI Theory of Change: bring more people from many different
background to discuss it together, and ask different regulations. Transparency
and accountability.

### AI-related projects
**Responsible Computer Science Challenge**: ethics and real-life effects of
computer science all over the world (project in partnership with universities)

**Common Voice**: involves ordinary people speaking many different languages to
create open datasets for voice recognition.

**RegretsReporter**: browser extension to report YouTube paths leading to
"regrettable" videos --> you report them to the Mozilla team to check how bad 
recommendations on YouTube are made.

**Creative Media Awards**: AI-related projects that raise awareness, such as An
interview with ALEX, MonsterMatch, FutureWake.

**Trustworthy AI Working Group**: groups of people bring a project, an idea to
make the future of AI better --> project submissions are currently open.

**Data Futures Lab**: who gets to collect and have control over data and
projects? E.g. gig economy workers such as Uber drivers are collecting data to
sell it to public authority to gain power over their industry --> data seen not
just as exploitation. Or patients are collecting data to decide how institutions
should use them to make research.

**Mozilla Festival**: an important moment to meet many different people from
many different communities, about all of these topics.

### What can be done?
The health report is also going to be a podcast (IRLPodcast). 

---

### Q&A
Lack of diversity is in many different fields, it has to do with who has the
power, with our past. It can be solved not only by employing more minorities,
but also creating entirely different products that include more different
perspectives. Building differently, listening differently, being willing to
create different kinds of technologies. 

Exploring alternatives and being willing to try different things at the consumer
level as well --> refuse to keep going the way things have always been going
(e.g. using social networks). Otherwise it's difficult to create space for
something else. Part of the answer is interoperability (be able to bring your
data from a system to another) and regulations.

Vulnerable people can be all of us (everyone can be vulnerable in some sense).
E.g. mental health apps --> they did a research about their privacy and it's
terrible --> it can even be shared with the user's employer for profitability.
Data that is missing for some parts of population (e.g. indigenous languages):
how should these projects be funded? Only big tech companies would have all the
resources... You cannot have a one-fits-all solution. Technology --> building
something that other people can use --> it also have some risks --> something
that must be continuously explored in organizations as well as the open-source
community. 

Lowering down harassment --> knowing who everybody is online would not
necessarily make it safer. Anonimity does not necessarily make things more
hateful -- some people don't have problems being hateful using their own
identity. So, who do you protect the most having anonimity in place --
vulnerable or hateful people? Important thing: keeping own data on own devices
only. 

Considering an ecosystem approach, we should also consider that content
moderators are terribly paid and there is not much transparency on how these
things are done --> big tech companies as well as consultancy companies (those
workers have PTSD). And there are more users in other countries such as India
than in countries holding the power such as US --> there is more moderation
there, with less users. We should also keep in mind that hate speech etc also
exist beyond social media.

Surveillance of big companies that play a role e.g. in blocking protests: it is
important to make sure that no one has control over the whole pipeline, e.g. by
using VPN, by knowing who caused internet shortages, why, how long it will last
etc. Individual platforms that have so much power (e.g. Facebook over social
media and messaging apps) --> it's important to have alternatives, and we still
are able a lot in this regard.

Is there also data about people with disability and internet accessibility in
the internet health report? It still has not been covered in depth, but it is
very important because if internet becomes more accessible for everyone it is
also a benefit for everyone. E.g. make sure that technology works with low
connection. 

We need to ask ourselves what role we want to play in the internet ecosystem. 