## What do you want to be known for? 
### Angela Parker

Wanting to leave a legacy, finding a way to leave your happiest life. 

We always ask ourselves "What do I do?" when we make decisions: sometimes answer
are easy, sometimes not (do I take this job?). Today we're going to learn a tool
about how to answer faster, better and with less regrets:

This tool is **values** --> once you understand why things drive you the way
they do, you take the wheel. Knowing your values is a super power that you can
apply in any situation.

What is a value? It's a belief that becomes part of your identity: comes from
our family, the community we grow in, our body, religion, disabilities or
problems... 
- Her definition: values are your belief in action. 
- We reveal our values by how we spend our time.

--> we need to notice how we spend our time. For example, before this
conference: were we nervous? Excited to learn new things, meet new people? 

- Values are the driving force behind your design making.

Every time we take a decision, there are so many factors to consider, or even
over-consider. Knowing our values makes it much faster. And values are the key
to leaving a legacy.

### Values discovery exercise 1:
What makes you an angry cat? In a way that we know is not okay, for a thing that
is really very small --> we feel this way because one of our values is being
stepped on. E.g. her partner says he'll do the dishwasher, she gets angry when
she finds it's not been done and it's not about finding dishes in the washing
machine, but because for her it's really important that things said are also
done (follow through).

Another example (Jessica): discussions at work about which language is best -->
really, it's about inclusivity because someone might not have a high level about
a language.

Or: the boss says a thing is working fine but he did not check it thoroughly -->
it's actually about being competent.

I thought about: food waste at home, bad code at work.

When you lead a team (even a family), people have a lot of opinions and with
family (or friendships or relationships) we lose our sense of reality --> which
value is being stepped on? Always ask yourself this about others as well.

### Exercise 2:
If you could infuse everyone in the world with one quality, what would that be? 
Some answers:
- caring
- respect
- patience
- good will
- creativity
- honesty

--> whatever quality you would infuse in everyone else, it is one of your top
qualities. 

### Put your values to action
What is the biggest decision we are currently working with in our life? 
And what are these two values we thought of?

Decisions mean so much to us because they are important in our life. If we make
them according to our values,

**If you don't know your values, you're honouring someone else's.** 
We come from families, communities that infused us with their values. It is
really important to take our place and decide what matters to us. 

And knowing our values, we can also understand what we want to be known for. 

---

### Q&A
She wants to be known for helping leaders not to have blind spots. Which means
having looked into what our dark sides are. We all have things that we don't see
that are so wonderful --> those are the things we want to bring to the world,
and getting to know them leads us to be what we were meant to be for. There is
nothing about us that is not ready to be seen.

Is it possible to live or work with people with different values? 
Absolutely! We live in a world where everyone has different values. It would
also get boring if you surrounded yourself only with people with the same
values. In the team, everyone can have personal values, but there should also be
common team values which include everyone's top values (otherwise you would get
an angry cat).

Deeper-level values vs. bridge values: the second can bind different people to
live/work together.

How can this work in a remote team environment? Sometimes it's hard to know
other people's values, because you can miss interactions. But also for friends
and family that might be in other countries. One thing that could be is not
having a clear common company culture and values. Who is on top is responsible
of doing it. It should not be made top-down (e.g. Uber) --> you absorb values
and culture from your company from behaviour, not from a document. If you're not
in a top position, you might ask your colleagues to do these exercises, share
the answers and maybe even add all personal values in a document.

If you take a step back to have perspective after a dishwasher-like episode, you
can see if your values are only stepped on in a single/few cases (e.g.
dishwasher), and in that case the relationship is okay.